# Documento: seers-1963-the-limitations-of-the-special-case
Source: readings/bibliography/seers-1963-the-limitations-of-the-special-case.pdf ## Página INSTITUTE of ECONOMICS and STATISTICS, Oxford THE LIMITATIONS OF THE SPECIAL By Dum^ST SEEIS worii ovmeas on probkam ttf ecoofflnk <lev4^o{^i^EC, htt had tor^ectontheus^ubi^ofhisfHibject.
I must atk ti^ reader to underhand that dote penonal con^ct wtth the pn^lona of l^ckii^u^ couxttries instih, fen* many reaaom, a sense and uxcDR impatience. EoomnnicB seems vary slow in adapting itself to reqimemoits of the nudn t ^ of Uie day-the dinunaticm KA acute povnty in A£ri<a, Asia and Latin Amorica-just as the previous gei^ntion of econc^iists fiuled U> cope r^disticaUy with eoonmnic flu^i^ons until ^xxx the c^res»on had broug^ politically catastrophic multe.
The life cyde of «u^ period in the itevelopnusit di an ecoiMmiic doctrine is now fumliar. Scnne grmt i ^ e of public ectmomic policy appous.
eoommii^s in high places r^use to admit tlurt thk a any amcon profe»ion.' S<mie of i^ wisatt aiUghtened, it b true, find a pk»e in the syllabus for the question (an a^kiitional diapto' or an optionad swninar), and di^uss it in print, but tbe treatn^t is quite conventimia] and sema unrealistic. A few hoetics make thmaelves unpc^ular by d«naniting mudi more emphaus and perhaps ev^i a da&tttxA the(Hy, with different policy impUoitions. One m ^ t cadi tha the ' H<^»cm pluae '.
Meanwhile politi<a] tennoi^ mount; a growing propcMtion of ytmngcar members of the profe9»ion are attnK:^ intt> tl^ fidd; and tl^ journals carry papers which canmH e^ly be fitted into the tradidcmal (kxtrine, but which on the other hand cannot easily be ignc»ied. This is the second, or 'Kahn', phase.' Lato*, a sizid>le number of Ae younger gmo'ation by a Keynes; they una)ver what are now @^ing l^es in the I am grateful to Mr. Fei, BIr. JoUy. Mr. KeniMMly, Bir. Reyntrfda^ and Mr. Wmswk^ for OQ an f»rly draft and to lib. Streetna for an extaoaiwe critique, ifHuch iiu be«i I U h h £ k g p ^ y q y g Growth Center at Yate. which provkled me with tl^ r^^te fmn |»actkad work profHHMMuJ stimulus to wTite this and other papers. Hie geooaJ argmncait was put IcHrward in a discusMon group of which co-<»|[aiiixtffs wef« Bfr. Gnmwaid asd Mr. Lam^iusy.
• Tito story a told ia Latin Aomica of a Qiitean graduate indent «d» stated, in aaswn to a questkffl by a very emin^it LcHMkm profeasw, that \» wanted to imeciaWfe in tiie of ^vek»pai»st. *Oht' saki the prolww. 'What eotmomks is that?' Thu was 'I in the 19S0'sI ' Kkhard. not H»man. naturally.
A

## Página
td d M k rtd% b ^ not
;«id erect« new mst, so ^lOM m die ^paeokmkm n ^ btdbsd ^ t^H feme get dbeur just ] ^ p f ( y hk kctiire iiolea YiiitQ ^ next goisn^m » alieMfy dm&dmi^ If flieie intt ever 8 tiine i d i ^ i»e ooiiU Me a i n i ^ i«v(rfiitm nii^ dbetd, it » today. And ^ rm(8it am, aa ahi^pa, beoRue the bo(fy of tibef»y cannot o^lain ipri^ hm to be eiq^ttoed, nor am it the hdip tint k pt^tkatty eatentud. What haa 1» be exj^auni n why ectmomks grow ^ difoott ratea, ami ^ he^ diat govemniQita need most a wAvkt on how to atimukle It m dkar where the foroe w h ^ 'mXi diaru^A ^ Md]9ect u emecging. In the past five yeais, mqi^knce widi povo^ hM ^rown, Init <kv^>{mient has tkthat aJbwed cknra in die pocn^ eccHUMniea or b e ^ K^ompanied by ' ^ severe tettticpa (e.g., payii^nta ckfidta «id infli^km). Int(»ieof Us CEunple Argentina uid Cliik, dMS pc^tkd po«tkm ui now cHttcai, and yet omventifmid eccmoinics doea not have a great deal to <M& by way of infill i^vke. Dcvt^o^^DGA k sdU c(H»id»^ as mody <ne bnndi, more an appei»iage than an essoot^ donent, oi the aylUnia. Oi^ hears die tom 'develc^iment econ(»nitts* as if t h ^ were a race apart* The p<ditkal dan^rsare IKVW so obvkn» that thn ati^ d t^hin cannot conimue. *n^te are many pressing questi<»u cm ^Mctt {mxEessimuU hdp has so hr b^n very meagre. Whm m h jusdfiabk to use bAKnir-intmsive but o«tt-of-date teduuques? How am oat dedde what to ^xatid cm educatkm as opposMi to c^itd inve^ment? And on secondary eduadion u agaimt ]Himaiy? Can capitalnnitput ratios be m ^ as a gui^ to savii^ no»ls, and tf so whicii, and with wiuct quUifia^HMi? To vdutt e i ^ t , and when, ck>es eamomic aK Iimh ^0wth? How <k)ea export diversificatkm help to simulate What aiHt of central iMtnk shoidd an exporter of primar>- And so m aiul so Attempts to deal widi pn^lems sash as these will end, if d^ history of economic thoiig^ b uiy gukk, by dianging the attitude U} devdopn^ait in ecomanka, and tl^refore the wh(^ bod^ d economic theory.
N^uraUy we canmit si^ wh^ die duui^n wQl be. It is not for any membor oi this gono'atkm to anticipate the essential diar^terutics of the doctrine (tfdte next. As has ahrcfs beoi tl^ csse, we shall greet profesaional novs^tiea wkh hsmmt fuA to uncktstand tl^sn, and fig^ gainst than vehemently. Hie date is too eariy to foresee what form the necessary (in ftct * This cycte m of oofoim not ooofiaed to ecomxeucs. HIIM tme co^UI teUc of tte 'Bruno phase*, the 'CofMonicu fdwie, uid tlie 'Kqder-Galtleo phue*.
* The qwstiffii o< i»liy tcfmomkO* almott coiiiptoti^ nc^ectfld ovtnm» coontriet, A ai growth. U« so tnaaf daowlM. is a& hitnrasting one. bat it» k ^ g lies m the i^d of sockilogy, not econmaka.

## Página
TBB UlflTATiOia (Mf IBS SKSUL CUM
<tf tfae «d)ject wffl tdce. We n e not evoi in a
1 ^ fo be 4smoladied ^ tibe <dd ^bcAm p be MTved tad a^^Hied Inr fiirdier use. tlik it ttill Bomewhat h^ in tlie piiaieS <»' <»ffy in tlie 'Kahn The'KiAffi afti^'mi^ BMit yi^ bi¥e be»i fmblahed.
aitide k, <tf coitise, dutt ndimfy feoo^Bket tt as nnidi st tbe ^ne; <Hily in tiie pbne' can id bntofkal wgniflcince be i^^n^datedL AH one can that ifttoiq^ to tolve pnctial ptobleais <rf devdiopmeBt sat going to t«K& ttt a peat daH aboitt prooenea of eotaioniic cJ)«]^ and die » alsMWt ripe ios tl^ iqppearmoe erf a Keyneit (tbcwgli di» tnk may be b ^ tf ^ C ^ ob^idb to d^ reeomttn^tiim <tfeo(momicft k tbtf we bave not really g d ttill km accepted, tbe pmnt dutt tbe aiib^a we bave iidi^oed was built m and fcMr coimtika whb w b ^ tbe prokaakm was £uniliar, n a m ^ devdoped inditttnal economiet.* To para{^irase a dictum (^ E. H. Carr:
Btrfbre ycni tmdy ecmuMnka, acudy tbe eamcankt; b^c^-e ymi ttudy die economiit, studf bk bkttorical and todal Tbe wbote butinew k maite tmuk mart ^Saah by tbe wi<kspread tbat autbors and k^unaa bave, oi not mady ocmceaatratix^ on tbe ea>niHnics of MHIK devek^ied indwtrial cmmtfy, but |»esattiii^ it » univemUy vaUd. Teicd»oolca or lecture COUTMS wHb quite geoaal tHles^ utch as 'Econmnic Principles'^ 'Banking* or 'Public Finance', tum out to be really treatises abcmt e»»u»nic prindpks, buiddng {»r public finance in tbe United Sutes, tbe Unitnl KingdcHn <»' a typical In tbk resptxrt eccnumui^ are mmxevtiaA kss tbui ri^prous. A book k not called 'Prindpks of Astromnny' if it rders imly U> tbe eartb &r tbe 9ai:a or even tbe locd galaxy. We justifiably eaipect a tec&ire cmrse on to deal with otber amtinems bendes tl^ one on vdiidi tbe to live, unlen the d ^ k duly qinlffied. Ev&i avoid thk orror.
Tbe comn^m failure to ^>edly tbe frame of r^»«ioe, wbidi k so to mislead students and to binti^ tbe »ibject's develqHnait, k at first sigbt puzzling, b«aii»e tbe devi^^ped i^t»irial ecoiumiy k 1^ no meam typkal.
Viewed ftt»n tbe point of view <^dtba- bistcHry or gec^rspby, it k an extremdy rare a»e, and enviously so. Tl^re bave been only a few sudi ec(»H»aiies for a few decades; even now they cover cmly quite a s m ^ frac^km oi mankind.
It may be argued tbat ea>ii(mucs k intematicmal in its scope, ai»i provicks an The timurforma&m now MI tngger aiul there are a Diimb«' of candkUtes for ted U» 'Habttm' td thm ge^tatko-«^.. M;^Tdal. Prefauch. Singer, ai^ Narkae. I wouhl be iiwU^Kl to iHHataate Prel^Kh. because it a a charactMistic ol a *H<^)«»i' tibAt be ts effective partly beoutte be does iu»tqm«ei«a]iie what he a d<»i^[ to the »ib^>ct. Beskln, PrebMdb Uves ctoenr to tte aeoonlc iaalt from wfafch Uw tremors a n imunating.
• We can hardly t»qpect as much *«qriaittti<»' (in a s^atatkml wmm) of giowtii as of * A* Arthur Lewk mj* (Th* Tktory of Ettmoimc Gfmtlk. Introdimtwit). Then » a ] to amaw tiiat tlM t^ngs wbk^ aie UKidated in tlw soc^ty we kmm ^ b d i U l d i ' y g must MweMarHy i^m be assodated in aU o t l ^ aodetie*.

## Página
test. Are eoMonAtils in fiKt mcomlUi woflii^ m oon-ii^htttral OHiiitriet? I wmM fmt m Cfvkteioe (tfiotif^ you may hsve to til% my wi»d fiM-h) a pcam on ii^& ^ r e is i«»laprei^ i^r^ to are very Bttte tac w«a*mg im Ac jm^^ma erf ^ fo d ti ccaMMs y g j q>e country wandi dH^ have (kme ao for aome yeaia, and timi cmfy if are imunuAy Mk^ptable. EogineaFa « e ]>robid>bf mcsre uaeftil ^ n (m eamomic pn^ksma in theae paria <tf the wmAdt at ^itt until te * k Th ^ f the latter have had two or tinee years* eaqMrknos. Thore n ao mudi fot ucs gn^fai^es to unkam-and un!^c»^inai^ tl^ abler die ttu(iait has been in dM<»bing ^ oirrent doctrme, the more dtficiih the fmxxaa of ffl^iAion.
In any cue it »inl^rei^ in^launl^ that a *gaiaal ^ie(»y*, <»r dF any genenUity, can be denved from the esqio^ux ol a few h T d i y g y , q ^ cxHimrks with highly unimial, not to aay peculiar, charMtmttica. Teadiing whk:h concemratea (m th» type erf eccMimny n a«newhat dkn^nted, ami the is dang»m» if those tewOiing ftul to te-eaa continual^ that t l ^ are g deaimg whh what is a lu^ily q>edal Tte typkal cme m a largely unmdi»trialized ccom>my, the foreign trade <rf whidi con^^ essentially in aeUii^ primary products fen- manu£«:tures.
There are about 100 ideotifbble econc»nies (rf thb aort, covering tl^ grt^t maj<Hity of tte world's pc^fmlation. Th» is also fiHtunately the nMJSt interesting and imp(»^t type <rf econ(»ny, fc^' it is here Aat eccmomic problems are reaUy acute and the economkt*s help is k l p were once mwe keenly aware <rf the limimions of what they John Nevilk K^i^s quoted Bagehot m spedfically limiting f tai^xL Thtffi J ^ q g p the sibject to ti« study of a » i ^ kind of sockty, *a society of grown-up competitive ciHnmerce*. While himsdf belie\^ that there are some universally applicable abstract pHiuapIes, the ddo- Keyi^ pointdi out that.
so for as cxmcrete doctiines woe oMusBrned^ *tl^ relativity follows imm^t ittdy from the realntic amcq^ion (rf thb por^m (rf the advice adopted in an eari^ (^pter. It» as true of ec(M»»nic conditkms, as of social ccmditions in goiera], ti^ tbey are ev& subject to modi&ation. They vary with the I ^ fofm (rf aodetf, and with national character and institutions. Even ^^^re tl^ forces in (^>enttion are the san^ the relative stroigdi that ^lould be i ^ g D ^ to oK^i may vary indefimtdy. Lam, ciaKmi, a>mpedtion, &3mbinatkm, are agoits in (ietomining t ^ distribu^m and exchange of wealth, noone(rfwhichispr(^^lyatanytimealt()getl^in(^>erative. Buttheextent of t l ^ influaice, and the manner in whi(^ it a exerted, are comtantly Pvticubsty daagnons if •onwbody wbo ha* karned Anflo-SftJEOii ecowHitks to T«m>dw% it miCxiticaXty at s amv^aity ka a i^B-iiHimtrial ecoiuimy. uolor h ^ to ft tit Mny stn^Bti fiod that tlie only wav to T«m>dw% it miCxiticaXty at s amv^aity ka a i^BiiHimtrial ecoiuimy. uolortttiiaty this ^fflois only too often, ao tiiat aMny stn^Bti fiod that tlie only wav tliey can ai^ tbe pci^HicHBal qttali^^tiftMis to wmrk mi ^ ^ own oc^otry's ^tjt^krau ki to tal» « course may in &ct make tbm ^ , at least tnoporarity. more dfflktt

## Página
TBOt UMETATK^S €m tBB WKUO. CASE
; tnd tit^ iwi^k^t v e d i n ^ (^ m^tstmoe ti aSeenk^ ^ relevanoe ol eGtmoadc 6octim» m r^M^m to actual eofmrauc At t tare modem eaamph, J o ^ Robmtcai:
to K^nieti tiai^ bem tocuttimied to tttume » t ticMy accept btdq^round the uittteiitimit and pr^kstt oltiie I^^bnd etd^ whisi tibeir w(»lEi are ttodbd tn oAer dimei and odicr perkids by readers who is^xNt otber atwuii^kina, a gfeirt <teal oi omfii^cm and argimiait at (^m^pmpotm ariaea in cc^ieqttenoe.** PerhafM the atnmgett ^itanem d the other «de waa l^ Rdbbina: 'It is only fiuhire to mUze thb |i^., thift ootain bane Mami^rtHKia are trfimii^sal af^lkabiUty and that m^iil dedi^tkma can be drawn from than], and a too exduttve pfeoocupatkm vndi the wbaidiary aaaimifmona, ivhidi can leiul any to the vkiw thift Hxt lawa <^ £com»nics are Umtted to c»tain d time and ^Moe, durt Uiey are purdy h^torical in diar»:ter and so cm.** Abo Bauer: 'I am now convinced (^ ii^ voy udde aj^lkability to uncterdevdoped omntriea of the b « ^ n^io(b of a{^n>i»di of eocmomks and more diementery conchiaioia atemming htmi ^eae/^ CharactmsHe feehar& eftht tp§dal em$ What are the featurea of the private-enterprae industrial ecommiy dise make it of limited prcrfieaaifnia] rdbvaiK:e for work in otl»»^ ecmiomks? I can only indicate these ha:e in note form.
I. Fadon nf proAuctum
(a) LtAaw: Lit^ate and mc^ik, mostly in employment; h^hly organi2sed;
radal. reUgimjs and Ui^isdc differosces tuait suffidendy important to break up tl^ labour «ipply; subsUmtial quajxdtks of dtilled and professional p {h) Ltmd: Mo^ avBikd>le land cultivated, ami by priva^ owners with secure lettdbolds) in plots oi eooncnnic uze.
The Scofte «md MMod of Polihcml Eemom^, TO. 294^ (1897). It » iat wtotlM»- this Keynes w(»ijkl have entitled a book <m tbe flwirtmtinra ai a 'gMoeral tiwoay'.
* Ejumses in Eamaimc Anaiyns (p. xvu).
*An E$$my tm Uu Nm^tn mid Sigmficmkx of Eamtmtie Scitmce (dup. III). In fact very book has a nombcn- of wqMmtwffii wliich are f»ly true, if indeed th/ej are true, ai highty medfic ONMUtkHis. Tlias it a h ^ that reda^iilmtkm of real IDCOIIK is virtnaUy impgofible. becaose dbu^es in tlie stiiKrtaie of fvioes wdikl Awart it. Tius A hkh i b i h h f k to taU b is obvious «EM>agh m»B the OBoma of occ»patk»s, teatto actaaUy to be oamoemied by o>inptttati(Mi in mmiey if we anopttte tbe prtqportiim (rf tbe pcqmiatkm iKnr prod»:aig n^ iaoome ba tbd rich wiM> wonid be twiMid to i»od»dng real income for the pow it is ea!^ to see that tlw iaoreaae avaiUU^ wooki be ^ ^ 1 ^ ' This se^ns n.thei a Wikl s^wment, even for an ectmomy rach as the United Ki^^ni in 19^. Was tbe ^bsequent redimibation of ^amat en&dly aa iUwBon? Ai« resoarces so specific tlut tibey cannot nwye in reHwnse to imidttate joice change? Tlw> ^opoaixm that iiKsome cannot be J i r i b d M h U b f ridid ^ i U i nwye in reHwnse to imidttate joice change? Tlw>
r»Ji»tribated wa«M hanUy be of woridwidie a^iQUi(» * B^memut AmUym mtd Polity t* Undtrdesttopfd state that IM M thinkiing enecuUy of UM <tei»mts of y y p (p. 15). Hioer go» <» to state that IM M thinkiing enecuUy of UM <tei»mts of raf^y and d«sand analyse, aad his exampln cefo- maJboly to ^u^city of factw rap^y. l^t raoun^es in a narrow range and fnmi a fsw oovatriM wcmki mit neoMsarUy sabstantiate a pwq>osition ol sadi graaaUty.
OniM i»evk»m footn<rte rangesta tihat Ri^Mitt would mit agree tiiat timre is mcddlity of iaboor kl the United Kwigdom.)

## Página
and emsfSf^usBtm qntana of ttaiMfiort mi pemm,
( 4 &ampm$: A -m^ fidd fr«»n wbkk dtrqacawaa can be ibaifii, and a fiiEvoiiiiA^ d&inie for CTiterf»riM; finn kfal terii Icff II.
/
^ gnaiihKn: Whiolty c(Himiercal, and & x 3 ^ in rc^Kinae to dumgea or technical advances; for^n ownefdi^ rare; exienaive test Hxraa.
(6) Mn«|p; Of touted aize and in ^ hmda olbcs] fiiim.
(4 MiattrfeOurii^: IHvetaified, willi a hufge metal-uamg ia^taetif pro- ^KU^ (fltfer o&i) iiuidiu»ry and vdiidea; amne areaa of competitkm fiii h l th ^^ rita i i g mining;
natisral reaouroea a(kqualefy aurv^ed.
in.
(a) Beoemm: ^rm^ reliance (m direct taxes rdative %a im|>ort ox export duties; tax laws enfofceable.
: Ii^u(ks b% cnid^ cm aodal aeoirity and agr^uhurst sabat(iies, r^Aively little on public vrorls.
Trade
(a) &^orts: Consi^ (rf several products for whidi there is a large intomal marlKt, and ks ^i^ikh |»kx and it^tmie elastidties are &irly lugh;
expoft i^kes ^ennii»d by local cdtt and stable; e^qwrts aold to manv oountricL (b) Imports: CmmA largdy (rf prmmy products (some of which are also don^itticaUy) vdi^di C(Hne frvan many countriea, and for income ^rstidty (rf donand b mA high.
: Loi^-term cqsital flows and profit remittance of s«xm(iary import an^Bu V.
(a) Imame: Diatribiiticm oMxIen^dy equal (post-tax); voy few living at sub^tence levd.
: FCKKI not over^^lmii^^ tmp(»tant;
and maas production poaaibk, becaniae of tqpal distributi(m of income, nati(8al i»oaioti(m UMI l»anogeneity of tastes; prortige of VL Smm^t and motttmaa (a) Smm^s: Molnlixed by a ciqntal mariut, ooaspn^Bg a modt exdiange, a hfmd maiket and m extouHve na^kmaOy owned banking

## Página
tarn iMtrtJmom c^ rm ^ K U L CAS a eentfal batk tmd a ma«^^ curroac^; poraomd (b) Imo^mmii 1 ^ ^ {^ptthMf ovm 20 per o»^ ctf G.D^.); tmt amtott very knr.
VII. Dymam lufimmu
7Vadlt: No dooiiic tenden^ to deficit beceue cA ii^xmie elasticities (6) Fopnk^kmt Gfowdi fA popuU^im fkm (lesa dian 2 per cent a year), and uftHuii^fticMi i^^ativ^^r inodcrate.
A^atkmt:
^ v y ctf foreign livii^; atandanb not b ^ or a cause of dk II In br^, niiat k anumed k m aut(MM»n(H» and flodbte sodo-ea^omic in fdikb eadi buman beis^ re^Kinds uidividualfy to die material and wbk^ k «il]jeA to no fcmnidabk Tbe extott to wlu^ varicHa eoraiomk i^rindptes rdy (m tary scnrt n^kb bave some gamid validity (e.g., tbote sbowii^ tbe impliotion for pruses if ^mand uid mippty curves bave certtin dlu^ses and sbijft in cme dire^km ox aimtbtf). But macro-eccmiMnics k modier matto'. Ilbe bur<^ is surely on tbose « ^ daim tb^ tbk k not b i ^ y ^)ed&: to diow bcyw any fits vsrimis iMm-indi^rial eammnies, eadi wftb its own im^tuticms snd It ann(^ even be tidusi ion p'anted di^ tbe aggi^ative ca^gcnies witb whidi we now W<»4L (sudi m 'hbmir', *fuU CTf^ykvyment*, 'uvings*, etc) are to prcn^ useful in non«indtirtrial 'Hie inaj<»- in^tequacies (tf amvaiti<nial eccaiooiics Ux tbose dealing witb the typical case are tbat analysk fociaes <m die wrong jButtos, and tbe mockdb do mA fit at aU dosdy tbe way in wbicb lum-industrial ecc»^iniks operate.
One respMt in w b ^ analytical enpbttk k rstbor in;^>{»tqir^e k diat tim^ can olten be igncned wli^ derivii^ pn^Ki it cerbunly csnnot in eccHumues wbicb are undeitfevi^qped. In Asia, say, die need £c»'social and econimtk (kvelqnnent w«mld be urgent ev«i if time woe ^tbo* pqpuliftkm presmre wx riung a^irstiems. Ccaaequendy, purely ^ttk fm^xisitima are mostly irzdbvaitt, if nM actually tbe fn^ik^abfy unccHiunitted n^itude to growtb, intellectual^ doaked in positivism, y/AiSki perbaps juAified by local dnnimstances in dev^yped ecemomks, btt Uttk place wbioi f»ie k dealii^ witb econcfflik probteins in a mcne g^ieral seitte.
Tlie second orrof in onx^uttk k tbtt inBuffioistt attratuHi k inid to tbe * An E.CX.A. stady. in^aHm mmd GromA M Lalm Amtneti, asnemblet available Latin k n matntel to iJ^yw tiie eactoit to whkh tiiese vario^ MMimpticsM are valid in tl 20 r^bttct of tiiat

## Página
wmuum how miK:^ wath^ fasSisn hmi^^ ptogj^m m mdtatrisl fittle ilo<ulyt tfaatt tlMTf afe mo^e smicNBi ovsnett M olM^i^dn to ^^ywui. OKU* eamoiiiks co^ams tittle ^acomim d ^ tctmmias io^UcaticHis of policy tCK^ «idiM lami re£Ema, nsticmaliatkm, ox cqMtal levies, still educatkmal kvel d ^ ^ult labour force. la hndt i are tdben as giv«^ whoreas ^ quetlkm n i»«ca^ what institutimis to and how.
% mq»0veiiiails in &utriti(»i, btnauig, and beahh services are treale4 if s(t aU, » ircrenes in coosmE^fticm, rather than as influences on ^ fHiui IS Mill ahopar^ true (tfeifaicatifHL) H»e i^ain, this is underi^bbk in soo^ks whm eostkomic prc^press » ncA ccmditioiial on i«i«ng cpiality of labcmr.
It rnxf be argued tlmt &be eo^hasb merdy reliefs much of iiio(km iirdevant. Howevef, hat^tuation, lumr afto' hour, your af^ y«ir, ^o ytatUr mouCtet a^Rissous IBVOA WMrttt^ffiofiff anu n^BStecttnff tue Offtftrtniman^s d hmnan capuaty^ makes a studbat gradually ui^sted to lUMlerstand, let akme sc^ve, die prc^loxa d iMm^indiotnal sodedes.
Simiiariy, years dtXady and wtak with m o ^ s devbed to explain industrial edHKHOiies tcakt h lord fcH" eomcmiists to grmp die c^Maraticm of a v m diffoem type erf eccHMsny. One main difforoKX b t ^ (except for a few targe eccmomies sack BA India), »^3vity and emf^yment in the ncm-indiotiial eoonomy dtptsid vary m u ^ in bNOth die short- and the lc»i^-torm, cm the expcHt 9BC^o^. Moreovo-, die nature erf die reqxmse to changes in ocport cm die organkation of thb sector, e^ieciaUy wlMthar taxes, profits of ccHnpanks, c»r pes^nt incxmies idxM»b ti^ higtet share of ii in inooisbe. It abo ckft^^ cm die type of prochict (fMurticuIarly Aether there b any s%ni&3Uit dooK^ic marii^). Tlie role erf tbe ei|KMt s«:tor b rmrely stressed in amvosticmal econcmciia, aoA thb for a vtry pwd reucm^-in an induatrnl ecmuHny hardly any major sector selb the greater part of its output Thb haub to anotho' pcmxt. Ncm-ii^tnttial eccHumaies cuinot be unless studied in the context erf d^ w ^ d economy. Tlw sales (rf their particular prinary {Hroduc^ ta^ thm thnr ^n^^^jmiaAt, are de^roin^ by (i) tht rate of growth erf the industrial econon^ 1 ^ buy fircmi them, (ii) the erf desmnd fenr 1 ^ ciHmiu>dities t l ^ export, (itduch relict, mier a&t^ the wbstitutkm erf art^ial materials fcnr natural (iii) {HOtective meuures that limit impcnts into industrial ^^ncnnies, (iv) cm tltt distributkm erf tht remaining mariiete between inrious [Mny polk^, prefefential tar^ arrai^m^nts, etc.). One could argue diat industriid ecoiKmiia would abo be e^M^rio tmdefstand, if tlussame ^^»oadi were adopted. But they ek» not absolutely require thb treatm^itit may be f^n(HiiU>te to trest d^sn, wh^i b <rft^i deme impliddy ot i as h they woe dosed eccmomies.

## Página
OP tsB I^BCIAL CASI
Of oooiae, the deteli^inifflife of noo^sufanlml eooncffiaks mi^ beomie alK>
irf is^XHt pgjwmaiice. *Ilitt is^libs, howev^, is^p(Mt kmrfi^ea fm these ecooomiea (in co&txmt to friikh are already die^/tksped), die f(Hini&ig (rf con^tetdy new maxuimdittlrka. T1i» in turn requires inve^neots in transport and energy, and (<i^Biiii^ 'inveAm^tt* ali|;^b^ SSeree^) in educati(m, etc., and Uivolvea a didfie in the ocmipo^^m (rf impoiti, BiA ibe «ibatituti(m ;»oeeas lfy rea^ea a limit, w h ^ ia aet (in ti» main) by naUnal resources and fy ( the size (rf tbe bcal market. Howeva*, dus process and these Haata^xma are hardfy ^*ym^^«HI at dU in ctmveoi^omi ectmaa^a, ^^uch m so *gk^^' diat it misaea eaaoitial diaract»»lica (rf cfevekqaneit.
Finally a word ahimld be aaid thmst womt (rf the pecuUaritks (rf fiscal and monetary aectors wtdsk aSect the opemdtm (rf indtistrid ecommdet.
enmple, becauae (rf ^ heanry w d ^ (rf direct tnes ^kd the scale (rf , die public s^tor automaiicatfy compnoates, in some for fluctussk»» in the private economy. In non-indu^rial ies, on the (yther hmd, a sluII^> in trade can rardy be overcome the bu(^et into deceit, because the cmly means oi covering it will probabty be to run doiwn reserves. (Tim » (rf>i^(Kisly tme (rf fme {»rtibular t3rpe (rf non-indiutrial eecmcnny, an *opcn* eooaomy; there a f^ym^ts dbfidt q>pears inun^Uatdy, if intonal «^ivity a nmint^n»i in a slump.) So the government may in time be compelled to raise taxes or reduce (mdays, aggravating die initial (bwnward imputee. AiM>ther feature of the fisad synem in industtial economies, but not in others, m diat it operates to spread imxnne more widely over the amntry*s various rc^^ia and duis eimira that ncKoe get Idt far behind in an e(»n(Hnic adv^ice.
WhUe all indu^Hal economies have virtually coix^leten»>iKtaiyaut(mKmy, this is by no means univ^sally true. Evoi the laxgo* non-in(hjstrnl which man^e their omn curr»ides, hdk many of iht means of the supply of numi^, uich iA opoi-market compvues and foreign l^uiks, w h ^ draw finance from, o€ suf^ly it to, didr \ua^ ofi^es, may be quantitativdy important and thdr opaati(m may affect the iiKmc^ supply more than any tUspi ttkcn by the local (»itral i»aik.
se of their financial systoiffi, indu^rial eoommiies have b(m]ularies corresponding to their political fronti«s. But, nHben we kx^ at the odier types, we may wonder nd^dter the nation is the anrrect unh (rf analy^ at all. If fiscal «id mcmetary sytt(9ns are very t^iuous, geographical or mdal or religious banios may soil crfF parts (rf tlK nati(m into virtually sdf-(x>ntain^ sufch-eccmomies. For this reason, i»tmnal avei^jes (e.g., ifiC(Hne k v ^ wage ievds, price levds, etc) may have litde meaning, w4^l»9' t^ed for comparbon with o d ^ countries, or fm measuring progress ovor time.
An ^etm^k: the &mcgpt i^the matipUer
The bett wi^ to dancKmstrate that concepts camuA readUy be generalized from mdus^ial eamomies » to give an exampte. Hie usud treatmoot (rf

## Página
But ibe wi^ m ^i^ib ^sorae k mudt mk ^dM^iS' dtt comitary ankes sieel and raadioiay h goods. Eveiy lMm-indhi^rkl omimiy ^ ^ from dmMl a bttge friietbn im esftapmoA n e ^ n d tbe f^teA nu^iri^ ioqxstt idl ihek sled too.
tf i tbe effect cm in^wrtsvar^ i g f ^ d» tocal con^KHiem k ocmc^nied, die ioq^k^ons fw ncqxirta, tmpkffmtsnt, on ^dbetber tht investo^itt k umkrtidiai by oiHitractors, bU k ^ y departmem or {Hmte individi»k, and ako itt i d ^ b a it ttkes place near ports (nd^re tbe oiqxMt imypawties <tf ocmsijan^B are bgsy Anodier p ^ t k dot die effect ctf investmott ^ponfe im wb^ier local cmidhicHis are gaieraUy ^atic, i.e., on wAneOm there k unenqiloyed UdxHi <d tbe ri^t ^>e, qme c^^al, a ^ bx^m n^ibi^.* For reascms incficated ea^, mkt would not expect tbne elastkatia to be very bigh, particuhrly in agriculture. O»is«|uc»tfy,ti!»sec(^cbiy waves (^purdianng power win generate prke rkes, ratber ^an bigber ck»neslic m i ^ t and evoi tbcni^ tbere k a»nideniA>le k * Wbat dkk tskcaam m ^^cK^ot k tbat die medmusm oi inccane creatkm k b ^ ^ compkx, and die *multiplkr* cannot hs txpec^ted to bave a stable value. Naturally, even in tbe United ^ates die multiplier reacticm k mrt tbe same lor every s l n ^ fnoject, but om w^Hild bardly expect tbat die amipositicHi ctf tirtal invetfmoit (in tbk reflect) wimld dunge drsstkaUy from one year to ti%e next. So the way in wbidi the multiplier wf»ks can be ccnoidered st^k itff du; purposes c^ teadiing. In ncm-industHal countries, iMiwev^', tbe sncement ^ inve^moit in s particular Urge project may diange the median^n df inccHse cmticm. And tt cq>ital goods ix»iurtries •ge, as impc»t r^unes aher, as interns! communiattiom is^rove snd ss k (kvdoped, d » mukipte effects (^ all types <^ investment, and investment, will comme i <tf tota , g ^ y Furtbermofe, in ium-industri^ eccKoomies, fofe^n trsde k s more detaminait of income dian investen^it, excqn for a few apeciai ti ft^k d inqxHtant d e a q cases. Yet tbe mednninn (^ iiuxHiie oeation attrftnit^k to dianges in for^n trade wmy be quite deferent from wbat baf^pois wboi (k»nestic mvestmoit akers. One ctmtra^ witb indiaftrkl economks k tbitt we caimot usdtdly wink witb 'net* foreign investn^it A diange in oqpmts may be quantitativdy die san^ as a cbange in in^xms, so diat in «Kii case net fweign •FoiBially, the lack of an eqatenneot indaatry mentkmed in the ixrevtons pangrapb coold be coBsdered a ^Mdal caw. tmce it means that the price ^a^icity of dom^^ * *?Thii krt wBirt » slreiwd by V, IC It V. iUo ffl iBvertmeiit. iii«mie aad the in aa nadei^^oped economy'. (Jnium Etsemomnc Rm/iew. Feb. 1952); in MI ecownny India, tite foc^n txa^ Moect m mndh Um ifia|XMrtuit. Rao draws the comimiom that h h ibi leel d faXt ^Mnployiwmt in an ni^enltevefaq»ed ecommiy p y India, tite foc^n txa^ Moect m mndh Um ifia|XMrtuit. Rao draws the comimiom that thoe is no mch ibiag as a waqat level d faXt ^Mnployiwmt in an ni^enltevefaq»ed ecommiy.
See also 'Coal es la otHidad pnctka de la teorte M molt^Ucador ?' t^ Oivaldo Saakti {El THmmtn Eamomdco, July-Sept.. 1957). whkh puts more em|d»sis on the n»te of eiq»ort

## Página
rm uMiTArmm or ras IPBCUL CMS to ^ a«ne esifti^. Yet iA» n^emxmmi mxf be iae the asporta^ and inqwrti^ sectors are 6 rf k fr k p ^ q ^ % ( p ^ hmBdte6$ (rf nuka »ray from eask od»»). In any caae, basptat chaofea are ( e x c ^ m tkne (rf war or bkxJEKbX uuiw^sd by income fl dfy Idk ^ ^ leaa doady.
fy p
^ y
^ p of an expcHTt niq>h» mxy rd^ect aimpfy a 6e^ in getting ordas filled.
What tt mi»e knportant in ptic^e, die mag^tudb and nature (rf the rep»cinai(ma d ei^xnt fliM^utknui depoad (m asHndl exp(nrts have i^aaged (became wkm txp(at induabrin mi^ be Kifaject to hig^ or low tai^cm, may cs' may not be in ihe hands d fordgn con^panies, etc), and secondly, on fdl^lua' the d u u ^ in the ^ u e (rf oqKirts ii a cmmnodity was in the quu^ity apcnrted (^ in tea prke. In minerd ee(Hiom^, for example, export flu(mia^ma, espedaUy when they are due to price (dianges, are to some exiitat offaet by die variatiim in die profits (rf for^n c(»npanies.
Not n^rdy is inve^n^nt less important than tndt in tlUs context, it is very btrgdy induced by trwAt, particularly in die more badcward econ(HnIes. Miu^ inveatn^it tt^hiH' in die ex|x^ sectcv, in fadlities for die nunrem«it and ttorage of ei^x»ts and imports, or in the dii^bution (rf imports. Hie rtmoainda' la^efy depends on oqwrte indire(^y, through This does not mean that the idea of secondary waves of in(»me o'eation is compktely usdett (mtaide industrial areas. What h does imply is that, if the amctfA of the multipU^ is to be goEioalized, attrition hs& to be osncentrat^ from tl^ (nitset on the 'leakage' due to imp(xts (iiududing profits nude by foreign ani^Minies), imtead of this beia^ a h p y g ^ ) , ^ q introduced later, as is usually the case; secondly, exports have to be depicted as the motive force in income determination, llxe concept of a 'multiplier', in the taae of a co^^ent which can be opected to be die san» whatever tlu; ecommac Munulus aiul vi^tever the ^age (rf devdopnxm, is likdy to midead the stu(ient rather than to hdp him. It is a coocq>t whidi was developed to me^ a parti(ailar problem-^namdy how to undostand dus trade cyde in indu^ial countries, so as to devise poU(aes for redu(ai^ the heavy unemployment of the inter-war yeus. Such a coiKXpt could hardly have beoi thought of if economics had evolved in countries exporting prunary products ami in^xating ciq>ital gpod».
It may be argued that aU diese points can be accommodated within the traditional analytical frame; technically thb U true, but in hct the subject is not taugltt in this way,* and the «»nomi^ acquires a view of inconu:
determination which is a hindrance rathcs" than an auet when it coma to workii^ in mm-industria] economies. He may, for example, ^sily a(iopt a naively c^itimistic view about the poulbilities of coiiq>ensatory &cal policy.
* Hus iacidimtsBy iinjtlias tiwt 'the «cciel»atnr- ako cannot be titated «s a global coeffideirt witii a it^ile vatae.
* A man ndkal tine of enttc^B wmU be that oonoeirts tike 'tavwrtoMit' (as a bomoe(»it tttefoq^ do not b ^ tbe ttmlent wbo wiU w<^k on d ^ ^l^

## Página
*.&tMioiiiiV'i* At a
Tlie tesdxN^ k wbtt ea(Mikb tbe mind oi tbe Ma<toit mcffe tbaa ^ tbing ^le. Itus k something wbidi hs tucA mily reads uul reisa<k, but In (»r<^ to see texts m ^ exot on rea^te:s 'wbo will vrtnk on devdqfmi^f^ prdslema (ami who wffl dMamdves toadi for d»»<kss in dik ^ d ) , kt us look at one popular exaiiq>k, Ecmtomm by Paul Satm^mi, a bo<^ voy widdy UMd in tte imiv^sititt of dtt un<terdevd(qped and ^ef^iiaped oountrin alil^ and wbidi k, oS iKNirse, for many pur|XMa, One rettcm for its succen k tbe w:^ in w b ^ ccmtoaiporary ma^ial is to iUununabe problems. Itot tbk nttt^ial k drawn almost exdiuuvely frcan dtt United States. Tbe r«ukr gradually beccHB^s i^cuttmned to an ecoiKHny witb tbe abm^mal features indica^ above. Dtnnei^c in^s^ment k treat^ as tbe main detorminam (A iocoii^ Ust ocampk, «id die tradecyde mockl presait«l k applicable only to a diversified ecxmomy.
FcHrdgn trade k cmifiiMsd to a rebd^vdy s n ^ section late in tbe book« and tboe k no discunion of die different types of export sector, or didr implicatioxts. Indeed tbe relati<m betw«»t tradk and tbe (kmiestic ^^onomy k dq>icted in a way typicd only oi an indimtrial country; for exiunple, it is aU^ed that devaluatiim tends to re^ore ^uilibHum by expandii^ exporu and nKiudng importik^ Hc^e ^ain tbe ose in tne audior's mind s«»ns to be tbe Unit^ States. It k iKit o^viow lu)w devaluation of the cruiteiro €»uld restore ^uilibrium in Brazil, say, in view of tbe fsct tbat the price dj»tidty of demand for coffee k low; in fict iJtasrt k now a quota on coffee exports. Could tbe volume of imports be reduced when tbey consist ahm^t emoely of fuel, materiak, and madui^ry? Tbe evidoice of Brazilkn experiesice k rodly (^^posite; it implies that devaluation does not restore ecpiflibrium. CH (xmrse, new exports mi^t be stimulate on an adequate s c ^ in a <^ade or so, but d ^ l y the treatmott k quite mislouling for a Braalian stud^it, or smneone who wiU work in Brazil or tm probleim of (kvdqpniMnt os international econcnnics.' It may be arguel that Brazil is <m]y cme example, but a score c^ otlwrs could be given and a ungle reception k m o u ^ to ovorthrow an unqualified g»]^ralizatii»i.
AlduNig^ rderaic% k made to protective ckvic^ and tbe gold standard, thoe k no explanaticm oi the critical differeiux between tl^ functioning (^ *c^»en* ecsHHmucs-i.e., those without ncdiumge control, import Ucoising, or h i ^ tar^s-and c^ otl^rs. Ncv k tbere mffident matoial on the world f 760 in the &fth editkm. 1961, whkh »tiw edittcm under OHUfa)«rati^ * Discussing tiw a]^icaUlity tA tiMS ccmcept of an equiUtmum «c^)wage rate fax p revohttioiuay Cuba, Henry WaOidi ptmtts (wt: 'But ndiere the |Mrk« nacGhanism has httk infli^nce. the equHflmum rate ceasn to be ctearly ddhied evmi if domwtic aiki Ui I are gives. In this the Cubam^item difftsrs rsdically from tlM» ii^ustzial United States, v^bore a fow p«r «Mtt m tte pnofr-w in the exehai^ ratetheir -pndxxc^ can ctainiete in the world marlnt (m evns tmtns o« not' Mtm^awy PnbUmu of mm Export Etpmat^ (p. 216), whkh » m» of the sidef how;
to coQsidef how af^nropriate convmtinu^ eemiomk ]Hrin^^ are for an my which ea^cnrti primary jntMtucts. See abo 'EaqxMt fecwMMnies' hj

## Página
UMITATKINI O& fBB flPlOUL to mabU a atxidiem to aee htm ray particular country wimld fit into ft» t« wfhA aie d»s tmm iitflueBcea sm a €»iuibr3r'a ei^NHrU (and lUs rate ia Utde meo^m (rf iiu^tof^mal chan^, whidi b p«^pa onty to be ocpected in a work deding w ^ an Mcnomny 'vA^ae auch (diange has been limited in the paait century. T ^ que^on of wheth» ex^ng inatimti(ms permh ^ reaourcea (rf an eccMum^ to be mobilized, or prevoit thrai fn»n being, to feed, (dothe, iuniae and tmploy tl^ publk is not discaissed (alter sU (me can argue diat it » not a v ^ prening oche in die United States).
at page 775 are preplans (rf 'econoaac ^owdi and devd(^»nent* Even h&ce the role (rf industr^ij»tion in devebpm^nt is not out, nor for thia maXba is the read«' told (rf the patiotis (rf growth by modem researdi.
One of die main weaknesses of this text, as (rf many, is that the argun^ot is eitl^r at the 'macro* levd (rf the nation or, more often, at the 'micro' level of the firm or family.^ PnurticaUy nowhere is there a discussion (rf the »»nomics of either the world or the iiuiustry, which are pre^ely the interatvag lrtfels. Oddly aumj^ input-output uialysis is n^ntioiwd only in an appendix on the hktory (rf ecofumiic (kx^riiies, as a latter-(by veision of Quemay's Tableau icmunmque.
Finally, but above all, there is no (kscription (rf the various types of e(»nomy (petroleum exporters, metal exporters, cxMee exportos, etc).
The title of Samuelson's text should not be 'Economics*, but 'The Economics of the United States in the Twentieth Ceimiry*. In faime» one should add that, at least in recent ^tioi», the boc^ slu>ws relatively considerable awareness (rf the outsi(k iprorld (and of ecoiunnic hi^ory); most other texte claim gei^raiity with evoi I ^ justifi(sition.
The translator of the Spanish edition ap{»raidy felt vulnerable to the line (rf argument develops above. 'Lo que doeo es justi&ar mi ariterio sobre el problems planteado por les constantly refereodas dd texto a la reali(iad economics de los l^tados Unidos.** He argues that to adapt the text to the ne^is of the reader's own country would be (mt of the qiMstionquite different versions would be nee(fed, say, for Chile and for Spain;
anyway, the Unit(»l States wss a very important ci»e, and worth study for \\& own sake. But, in his view d^ main conuderation was: 'Se en(ataitran las ideas genetala con validez goieral para todos los situadoi»s estru(^uraies.*' In the fourth e(iition (1958) Sampson himself made the same point:
' &UBaeltoii jnstt^M devoting most attm^m tt> microecoiKWiks by aying {<m page 412): 'man bas pined consMk»al^ mastny over bis maooeocMiimuc jstibh^ns'. It is true that <Hte can aee tine aatbMkr » refcrring to tbe United States, bat stadmts may ws^ all realize this. In Miy caae tb» is no (tele^xi for a trastbook witb a titte suggesting that it is, as it is often tatoi to be, a geanal text. Tlie jwtifij^^ m £ t « » of a i^ndratt in Calcutta, say, be that economics te not so much a dam^ sraeace, as a calkHis 4^e. And is the tine even hst tite United States?
Joce L ^ Samp^lro bx the txai^^tM-'s introdncticm to tl» ^paniA vec&jxk of tbe thinl cA {Agttflar, Madrkl, 1958). '1 want to justify oiy jodgn^t tm the prol^m raaed by repeated ref«nmoM in the text to ecoiKMBuc cx^li^»s in the United States.' * 'Geoeaal kU»s oui be found witb univnnal vali^ty fen-all ^pes

## Página
*I like tt> timdt ^ t ^ bo^*s m&t vm «l»mid md U&aAig&m wtat b a rdkc^m of die r^i^uice to tocMet itf qpile editkm.) can be^ be jtulgc^ ^ we see hi>w ^hef would U»ek in anotherfidkL oppose a Uxtbook (m io(^>g^ imihed hs desorqitive siat^ul to hcHfses and dairaed thift the bi^ n k s d an ^ ^ editimi diowed itst to aoimab (tf qvitt W&&A pkyuoAogyP^ Ot amid (me azD«ii^Ei»m, a tpecki editiim (tf tiie nme bocd^ fc»r pets by sutiiig that the h(»«e WM a very imterestuag animal, anywi^ tf OE» tried to adapt the text Ua tibe needa d tibe home, one woidd have to write ^parate bodb cm cata, ^>ga, etc.? &M^ ai^^umente invite tlie ^udent to £U1 into the tr^ d treiting d^ iq>ecud one as if it vr&e the gs^ral <Hie.
I mig^it add in pauii^ that Mandst ^Ktbodiu abo seem to be of limited value for those who warn to undo'ttandecmioniicattylMd^wardcountriea. A example h Po&iaii Eammi^, prepared by the Academy of S d m ^ of the Sovkt Uniton. Thb treadae am be found in ttud<mt»' rooms in many ami b a prescribed tect for all depuixE^ots in the three Cuban nony ol the same critidsms apply. Hat again a deal <^ sp»:e b takca up by the vnifkin^ d an iiulustrud econcmiy; fordgn trade b mA maph^m^; tht tmtmsot b U»o global; and so on.
Tim text ha&f however, itn own, Uiough not unexpc^^, <l^«:ts. Metsphy»cal questions sudi as 'What b value?' are dbcius^ at l^igth, and the ^ dia model for capitalkun b cJaborat^ usii^ cat^^rks such as d aurphtt vah^' and d^ '(»ganic o»npontion of oipiul' which may have a pditkal functicm, but do iK>t se^n very helpful to the «»nomist.
No attempt b made to a»npare values of these coeffici^ita for d]tf«ent caprtalm countries. Sectioitt dtvouA to un«terdevdoped countries, including Laoin Amerka, creat than mi U ^tay woe ottoiues, virtually without any heavy iBdvmme&, and while «xipha«s b given to the rok c^ formgn companks, tiiere b no rderenoe to t^ir contributimi to local economies (thrtmgh taxes, etc).
Naturally, one cannot ccm^^lain that social kttues are avoided-the de^aiption of the various sodal dttses and of Uieir pditical roles and ideskigks wimld make mc»e sense than Samudscm doM to ttu<knts who have fifst-hand ki»»wl»ige (^ a partially indt^riaUased sodety, for oumple Qiile. Sudi ccmntHo are not wl»^y unlike what the eccmomies d Weston Europe w^e in ^ middle d the nin^eenth century (viiiidi afforded Marx * In how many Mx^ties hat vaaa aiartcped mmaty-^caa^mac ] ' My ccMBBiaestt are baaed oe tbe Spaaiili'lmgiiage edil^cHi (195^ nom b«teg tnad Cnba. ^ttttied Mmaud it Etmcm4a PalWea.
Aj^iwnmtly a mate «>-toHlate «dttii» is bea« fsepared, bat te wiU be nupritt^ if it pcovw to bo free (rf tlw I ^ t o tid b

## Página
fBB UMOTAlfOia or t ^ 01CIAL CMM
The *ta&tttrid reirarye aimy* of the myanpla^ m alter all to be ae» m die aHeeta, ai^ it (bea ] ^ the fttncti(m (rfke^ng wagea (town to sids^bence tevds.
Tlioae from m(Mre badnrard where diei« are large fcar^i-ofnied plafttadmuK m i | ^ find account (rf in^ierialiam iurty But die atimdard Mand^ «^eme (rf atagea (rf devdc^m^tt-from a primil^ ecoBOiBy ihrm^jti alaveiy and feiKialifin to c^nta!imsl and sodalism-acBtgrn too r^g^ Where would Ghana fit, im exao^k, whh itt ^SfsrexA tevda erf devdopmmti And what would be ita sodadism? Hie fiindamfaital iroaknesa s^ms to be that tbnre is Utde atunjdoa to ii»titutimal (tevek^m^Ett witkm societi^ at a ^ v ^ ^age. Hua ia no doubt a corc^Mry (rf the simpUstic view that revoluti(mary trantf(mnatbn (rf atructure is die n»in fonn of aoaai diang^.^ It seems thirt, apart from Loun's 'Imp»iatiKn*, the mioarial of whsdi is also by now (mt-^-di^ ihei^ has been Utde thetxex^ad pwgnm in a century. No UM is made, or kiuywhs(i^ shown, (rf any advances in th^ so(aal sciences. T^treatmmitcrfKeynesaUttlediortofscandakms.
(page 316) that he r«:»mm»id^ raising pro&s l^ r^ludng real wages through 'mBa^tm and that he advocated iiuseasing die luxury expenditure of the Hch and government expoiditure in armament' Tl^ auth^ do n(H appou- to be even aware of modon f^tual material that would be useful for propa^nda (ui^mployn^nt figure aie quoted up to 1^1).
Cotainly there is no effort to adbpt the (kictrine to umiadevd(^p«i coun^es a» they are today IKHT any scholarly ^Kwmon of their growdi processM.' The impUcati(m seems to be that if die sh»ddes (rf imperialism were ronoved, these economks w(mld grow spontaneoittly.* There » ncH even an attempt to apply the leaatma (rf Soviet ei^er^ice to their problooDS.
It is sad to diink that it is p r ^ s ^ the critical ttu(knt in Aaa or Africa or Latin Ameri(^ awe of the limitaticKtt of Anglo-Saxon textboc^ who may turn to Ms as the main alternative. If Samu^on's text a to be retided, the Soviet one should perhaps be caUed *A 19th-caitury Interpr^atkm of Economic and Political Cha^;e, l»a«l on experieruoe in Western Other mfiieiices on the eamomst The attitude of die student to devdopn:^ntt problom is f(»ined both before and aftor he reads texts on economic pdndpks. As a chUd and ' I ow« tiitf pmnt ta Mr. StroeteB.
* The Quantity Tbaoiy sdU h^ds sway in ttese ps^i. Thus mx page 176. inflaticm a d^cribed as a ciMMtitioo chanctsrised by tiie presatoe of an fficoHmve nuss of papa* amwy.
In Marxist jarfcm. ui argunimt of tha kmd, so o»a&lortii^ to the finanoal bomfeoiae, a b j t i e most tJ j e y * The anaiys* of the developed capitalkt ecoDonuoi Is iJso h ^ i l y unconvmcing tmwwriim kt ctrnvoyed ^ a t av«fage timi wages in the United States have decUi»d magx end of the iMt «»toryl Refenrmg to «ieBo|vt.tltoinanulirtaties that afta-fvioes carted to rae in lB9fJ, wafes dkk not lee^ pace. It is abo s J ^ e d tJtoA real wages hU ia E ^ d F ^ t i t o first p u t ctf the twmitiethoeBtury. Onemay b J ^ A ^ b Ut k b p y y stud»iti. Intt tiKwe ^MwbM« wovUt kaem it to be mMisose mt^ k it m l l y safe to Intc^ up tbe future poUcyauUens so ^^MmuBt <^ 1 ^ eooMimk iscts of Ule?

## Página
to te bed cooncm^, wkli m^di he nulios aad televitton tell him su^Dlbf idxmt Hs and at uhoxA he acquires a heavily naticmaltek ^^road^ to «re tiMidfy {Witted in a { unreal vrsf. It k IKA unusual fo^ the univra'^f «ttra»l to be^ve tiiat the in hb a>untiy» ifi^iidi^va' durt n ^ be, rqpreMnt ^ b«t to restftfthewiorid. Siikbjrside with thb chauvin^k f^xure, he may be pten^ttd wi^ a naive internatkinalbm, in a soise ite cmintorpart, si^^gesting that fcHrdgnoft ue tally amilar to hiii»df, Coring hb own c&mmmc and pdiiticid prgudi infl)i^ac» continue durii^ unda^n4uate life, by whidb time the {Mrob]«B of finding a ji^ cmnea to play an increasing ^ut in the formation of attitucte.
In the re^ oi tbs world, students may be evoi tm^e diauvinbdc than ttkcy are in industrial countries (8<m» c^ wlucb have a 1 ^ uuMNnire bans for thdr nttitmalism). While in (^rtain ^ d s thb lotds to itttempts at an Question suitable to the looJ sodi^, in c^fHumuca (as in die natural sdeiuxs) the outctaiM b more often, esp^aUy in a>untrii» liewly incbpendent, an exi^g»at^ fe^>«t for tib« m^teries of modom tedmiques.
picture slujwn in tht standard t«i^K>di is ther^ore aoxpt«l on all with little n»stance. In the industrial ^oiumiy, it more cnr le^ to everyday ecp^ence, and the student b m^ experience «KHigh to reali^ its Umitatioi^. For indents elsewl^re,' an econcHnics text shares the general glamour <rf all tc^mical boc^ from overson.
Since undbr^aduate teadun^ does not do mudb, if anything, to break ckfwn parodiialbm and to brii^ home the i«Uiti» i^ the BKidern econmnic wcnid, tiK recruit to graduate school o ^ y falls into tl^ ^ip of admiring tedmique fcur HB own sake. If the content b dull, the student turns to form, and thb b inde«l ^icoun^ed. Far from becomii^ more pi^^iod {as say, medical teaching does in it& lato- stagn), MXHUHIUCS b<K»HEies i ^ more atntr^t.
As H. R. Bowen has put it: 'Graduate ttudente (tf raonomics art cmtInmted with a v^t array d con^f^ technique, and deuiled th«>retictl OHistmctions. H i ^ perforce live in a strange world of indifference maps, curvu, OXMS ela^dty, nuurginal property to connime.
Uqui<Uty pr^o-ence, i»^ national ptt>duct, sampling ^ror, linnr aui^, and input-output matrices. They ^xsod mudi of tiumr time gaining funiliarity with specialized concepts and techniques, and ihmr success as graduate studoits b g a u ^ largely by the d^nx to which they master ^ «Tor8 are otwa aggrav&fced 1^ tint grom dwt(ntk»» in the fffc^w^anda ol tbe tcmrist iadtaMxy. {Thns a pktore » tmUt up of iahatMtautts of tbe Ca^Uwaa WUMIS as foritniaie dw^ters ia a yaradae (rf batdiet w d {Mini trees.) * A special catfl^nry u limt of tbe BtndttDt from orvenmm who wants to be ao^^yted as a inember of the jnttlmmon m the Uittted States en* "Wmitmn Europe. like aaytme bent cm aanmOatiaa, be m oalik^ to attempt a fm^asoMNitaBy critio^l xmuppniul.
* 'Qraditate Educatimi ia EocMiomics.' {Amm^^m Emmomnc RioUm,
## Página
uooiArwm OP IHE irwsuL GAIB
A certm p^t«a d thitdrii^ beoomes faa^ implanted ia ff b admifed, soe^ective ^ the purpose d the pp Tht hi^^iett pfabe Ux a pap& b '^fant* n^Ma* dun ' convendy, work whidb b not namiwty eccmomk may be des<7ibed a *tik3ippf. Hum <mtiook beoomes dbtcnted in £tvour of the fmhionable (Soo-ateswas^venheiidodili»>kisl) b {»urticu]arty 8e<hictive, <»^e sauI: *tht abkst young atiM^us tskit to dib fidd ai»l heavify on the rdiAkm d mid^mm^s and econc»nks Many of us are ccmcen^ lesl by an overcoocoBtrsium cm matibem^ks fht for stuify may be occesnvdy fliose mai^eet to manipul^ion by iht use of qrmbob md abo ^ t numy d the bat mimb in econmnics taaf be lost for the solutiim d die great fmbUc issues < ^ ^ day.'^ Hig^ify ^M^'sct eccMKmucs i^<famtly has aoa^ a^^h^k a^eai^ as weU u the intdlectual virtues of ^iparent preebion and perfeotsbili^. (AU logically po^ble escepti<ms am be discwed, so one cannot be taikoi by surprise.) As kmg «i it ranaiitt abstn^ ^ {Kracdtumer b preserved horn the anl^rrafism^itt of public controv^sy. An able ymmg econmnist, for a u^ic for a thesb ot fintt bot^ finds that manipuladon has the puticular and not inc(M^destU>le advantage that it an ufombiguous wsy of diowing a otrtsm ty^ of abUity.' ability cannot, f r ^ its voy nature, be denwn^rated in sudi an eai^ way.) Since I want to avoid die persmial ami ratho' sft»ile argun^nt about the role of matlu»natics in ecoiuHnics, I un not going to deny that mathematioi may be veiy helpful, pn^>erly u^i, in eomcmuc argunu^ My poim is that iu chamffi are probably G^rdinng an unl^sl^y influotce, at thb partioilar tin^ in the subject's evohiti^L For OIM; thing, progren in manipulation has contributed U> tht wid^rod, but really quite unfmmded, belief that much progresi has l^en mjMie in econmoiaL Secondly, since the pnxx^es of development, which are partly iiotittitional, do not easily lend themselves to thb type of treatn^nt, tl^ nKMre abk studmt o ^ find die field unat&active. In the thiid pla(%, tlu»e « ^ do work on the prt^kasa of non-induMrial econcnnies usually tty to force the material into scHiie g^i^nl model iK^ch they have bom taught, posing ovet the que^on whetiia' it was devised with a diflfcnait type <^ ^oncmiy in mind. Th(^ may ^BO try to quantify the model, ^m>ring whi^t^ the ^adsdcs are the task.
> la Tk4 TttukiMg of EUmtgtUaty Ecommncs (Edited by K A.. Knopf ai»l J. H. Stuns), p. 241.
' There are NunrmMy three tjrpes of ticaoxmiMt: thorn uriuo tut aombss, those wbo ose tetter* aiul tinise wtK> uae wwd*. V«y few are eaoally at imnM in all tittree means ol a m - montcatfon. <v even ia any two. A^vfarmoefeH'letfcnsmaycoiicealaia^of flueacytntl» 096 of tangnage WMI a lack of iatn««t m noni«%^ u^nisatxm, aad^or aa mpf^vmch to tiie pmbteau of wockny «^ich a h%hl^ achoaatk. beoiuse of a partttBy oonscKms desire to foUow bl tbe footst^s of the ickmtnt ]at>p«. (For at least two OHttoiies, towever. aatiml k & have not datmed tluit they cmUi nach taefol (xmchuMms nsaft^ by stttng m i f a i t ^ ) O ^b h d f y f^ y g and maaifrnfaitiag lymtx^.) Oa tlM» o^bm haikd, of owsoae. aveiwm to lettiRS may utdkafee lack of matlwmatKal ahUityl B

## Página
tm
It it Dol ^tjr ^ msm itf uMl^trifil eoenoemt idio iiAi ^ o dm &!^p;
. Lflas tj^ tegl writera, tbiy ggdy n>eci^ wMi wfficacnt ^giQr or ii» mBssoEag^otm at stir^ u m ^ wiwt cmtditknt tibef we Wb^ to itf due ]»oietin(m prkks i t t ^ cMd *i%crar*^ Mo(U& ofiei lett on Imm, but Vkx a doted are quite trtifidd ev«a 14o not ^kny tbat bi^bfy i^Mtmct mod^ a n be uadid, ^ kaift lor tome typet oi pxobkm. Tbe quettioii n v^ie^ier tbere a n>«n hx dmn, in view of dieirUmitedai^^ica^mandinbarentdangeft. It aeemt odd to introduce U> ^mixdic €Gon(ffliet b^(H!e diey are tatt^tl wbat tit^r reidly do mttd. to know, not mcardy fw t l ^ |mtfn»kH(id w^i^ but e^ren to ihaa to d e d ^ vrilM^ber any iraodd it melu]-llie ttruc^tre of tbe world econotBy UMI haw ^i» ^nicture it danging; ^ wnrlong oi tbe mtin m wffk»ktxrt and , and tbdr requir^t^sntt of bibcmr uid odier mqxmant inputt; the eoofKanict oi pi^ubftkm diAiige; tbe (»^puu»ti(m and operaticm c^ oc^nmodity markett; ibs fdatkntt b^weoi eainmnic tlze, ttru^ure and growth;
tbe eoofkomk impUcatiom c^ vaH(H» typet tA aodal imdtution; and to on.
People are b«ng turned cmt at <»x»KsnMlt vrho can draw diagramt illustr«b]^ ^ tbeory f^ du(q>dy, but ^Hio would not know hom to ttart <kaliiig widi tbe qiKttion (tay) oi wbetb^* a t^d indtntry tl»mld be ettablitbed in Guatemak, ox wbat it tbould make or bow mudi. Tbe majcmty do m^ kiu>«- a great <kal erf tbe ^xxnconic botmy evea oi tfcMnr own country, let alone the aiui procentt of d d ^ j p s ^ t in tbe Soviet Unkm, Yugodavia, Bnzil, Egypt, India or Japan-^to niaiti<m timie ctf tl» more interestam cma, Tbere a ahnott umvenal iiniorance of current todo-eeonomic at Maixkm, wbicb any eoomm^ wiiridng ovo^ett will come ox later.
It it true ibst tbere are utually teminart (at tibere are bodu) <m' Devdopmstt Eomotnict'. Tlitte are, bowem^', o ^ i bated im of tiie Harrod-Dcmor type, tt^etber witb tamt bitt and piecet of promdtd by tbe tesK^l^r {ot audu^) on tbe li^ut of wbat he k { biqypened to notice in ^xe cxnintriet be biq^pened to vitit. But a gk>bal may, !(»' reatm^ already givoi, mnkad tbe ttudent. He miy &hdy, tly^ be bat learned wbat b Imown about procettes oi Traming in tl^ i»e <rf^^itkftical m^mal amid belp g p in reality. Unfortunate^ *tlatlitical m^bodb* at utuaUy taugbt (ts at Yftle, mttt^ to {mt an ai^uia^t in SMtibeakaticftl i^rmboto ntiier than wordi win asjr tnlHirwrt

## Página
or not mmaxL CAA
It lai^ em
^ to i^j^smea^ use tbe b ^
» miljcet k a n^eum j jrioo from d^tf fidds, tiidi » budo^).
ti
^
(
^ tf fidds, tiidi » budo^). Tia kat aantcqitkm in e3auiq>kt uul e3i»:«»et n tint die data used ate t ^ firm a»l n^iiO^. It tt at if ^ uig caurp to ^^»e ^ fMTopertiea (tf d^Sereitt types (^ wood. Tbe ttu^iti m k tbui repeated^ dhmted I » » ^ > M tbeesMce of tibe i»obkm;
fial i^titu(te to d^ d l l i d bi^ i p
^
^ >
tbeesMce of tibe i»obkm;
an unci^fial i^titu(te to d^a m gndually acquired, wbii^ it n ^ uke yeaa tog^r^(rf.^ 'Rsens k not eviea mucb iMentiim to die dieoietkal proposittom (m (^n»s and bkaet ui virioitt bmiebes (^ tbe aui^ect, diou^ d^se would ^ p d»s ecowMniat to take uito account defect in die matoial, and d i ^ di^ diey otm diey itfect oitt§ c(^dtai(»tt.
It could be a^SiMsd Aat viitt an e(»noiiu« really imda ia at least a year's irork in a st^ftical office. CWy 1^ baving to &ce, bundieds (rf times, die miiMJr problems (rf tebulatii^ tndb mun», aitinging departmoital smes for pubbcation, and rqxntii^ wrv^i OT cattt»es, doea one iu:quire a g^ume 'feel' f(» die reliabUity of data, and dief^(»e ft» idiat can and cannot be (k»^ in applied ec(m(»niak Univmitia could, bnvevia-, l^lp sbortoi tbe probationafy period by sunub^ng prac^al esqier^ice. Tbis meam setting up researcb prcjecta witb actual mat»ial, audh as succeanre cei^usea <rf a^cultural m industrial productkm ((» perbaps imaginary document witb coi^nicted defects). Tbe Mudoit innild be forced to &ce the problems posed by cbanges in covor^e, etc, what be attonpts to amipare productivity (w price levd from om cewam year to the next If tbe point is teavily cmpbuized diat die (]uality of tbe nu^nal dc^^mines vwy largely wbat imalytia can be carri*^ out, tl^re wiU be less temirtiai(m to use ovovlaborsU; t^bniquea.
Tbe second M^t m stttistical te^jiing, wbkb may abow itadf in tbe graduate's subsequimt w(»k, is analogous to one already maiti(H^ in economics, namdy tbat be is t a i i ^ to numipul^e, ladMir dian to interpret Tbe ^pbttis is (m luw to fit r^ression liitts (say), radier dian on bow oae should read a r^res»(m digram, bow to (k(ade nHi^ber tbere is any pmnt in fitting a line at all, and bow to €hooae (widi an ^ e (m tbe tbecneticai implicati(ms) b^wem tbe difiermt scats (rf luncti(m. Anak)g(H]s could be ma(k of teacbing in tbe imerpr^]tti(m of time s»iea, and in dramng (»i^uak>ns irom sampks.
p
Tbe standard argummt in deSoice (rf abstract te(^imques, in bodi ecw3omicsandstattttics,iatbatit teacbesstudcana'bowtotbink*. Since in •««•-^ *

## Página
THE BDIXBTDI event tibcry iM tuots^ be kivfdved in em^aA woilu m m, kmit m to ^bkdE w ^ »roi^ eapf. (No ifeiil^ llie 8M[» argiimsit put ftHTVPard in tlie 1920*s idxntt tiie moddb tibm amr^it). It » r i ^ aid tha kiub ttudaitii to fkk op bid ii^»luii^ bdntt, tiM^ as «iteiiq>ting to exi^ran <te!vdc^mieiitft widi linear i ^ ^ a few ^ k c ^ v«rb^^ (<niuGli are % But m any c»e, tf ^ 9am » t o devek^ ft»aa] ^ y the i»b^ct8 neected are madi^natiGS and iiMM^m toped analfss. The drawbKl» QI t)K t]fpe ctf instni^itm whk^ ^tfta by giinng a^iraic i^Q^b to *labfNtf*, *aq>i^% ^ c , are two-fi^. Finft it enoHiraget bogm by tati^ concqyts widimit q>edfying thdr amtext {or, often^ p ing). SeoiHuS}y» »IMX ^leae ecMH:q^ hxwt red-Ufe aaaodatsmn, it to be te«:bing ^ aliu^it ami^hii^ them ecimmnk r, tlM drngca- (^ purely th«»redakl in^ruciaon in regresnon amdysb is tiiat it Mons to be teaming tl%e stud^tt how to do research.
Thoe is really no n e ^ to seardi U^ mat»ial that t(^;hes p«mk *hsm to think*. In many iiB|X)ftant ^ d s of economics, ^ttons oi^ge which make rather csms^ex analytical techniques appropriate, in fact ess^tial.
T l ^ indude peculation movCTinmts (e.g., 1 ^ me of a life table, the <knvatkm of rq>rodu<^on co^kdoitt, ete.); int^-industxy relatioiu;
demand trmds; and the processes of prodi^ng and i^ng energy. These provide ackqiutte, and mudi mc»e usdiil, opportunities for n^n^ Sy™~ The i^rm cf gettereUsiOitm possHUe Simpk explanatcny nMxkte cam-now be <x>nstructed for various individual «x»K>mies, and tl^se ccnild be devek^>ed into mo<kls for the different types of economy. Steps in this direction, wh«i th^ have been animilated, wilt be partiotkrly hdpful to tea^dios w(»king ov^seas who are anxious to tn to relate material to thdr pupil's needs. At present they have to provide th»r own glon cm the avaiilabk texts, »ich as Samuelson*s, and this is of course a poor «ib^itute fen- the tracts thai are needed. In any esK there are vexf few teachers V4H> have both the tin» and the capacity to do it at all mkquatdy. Many of those toachii^ in unctetievelqxd countries have heavy and/CH' fuO-time jobs outu^ the university. Some mistiuice is y naturally felt to tl^ idea that such a comn^ntary is nec»Kary.
But it would be wor^while to attonpt soncke^hing mon* gimaml. Tli«re are so oany ccanmcm charactor^cs that it would now be possibk to write a tact covering what is, and wiU be f<« sev«^ di^ades, tlus typical cm^ in eccmmnics, the unindustriaUz^ economy, even tfu>ugh sudi a t«ct v^mld at presott be voy rudimentary. ¥&• all such econmnies, a dynamic approiu^ is d d , with luavy onpha^ on tra<k, and thndbre on the or^iiization of h f fiat world ecmwmy and on the opo-ittion of amimodity markets. Tbere ue cenadn simikuitia in thdr sodal and eamc^c ttructores and in

## Página
utatATWsm OP tm
SPMCUSL aam espedaSy if d i ^ vte pemxped acoMtluig to die Mage (rf 4 » liidr growdi piticeiies dbow etmmiim at a low tevd (rf a^pr^rtkm, Recagniad^ f»M»i» can be seen in die IRI^ reqxmd to dii»t-perk»d Aii£tiH^(His, mad again more so if we gnnip tbk tin^ acccxrding to tbe t^gamxanABO. (rf die teading es^port se^or.
It Is taie Aat die mitterial f(»* writing mdi tots is «§ ized, die teaaum bdng dut we bave bardly abated on die taA ec(Hiomies (dwiqrs a voy eariy si(q> in a s^eoce), let alone making eoontnnies have, Wie NarciiSlU^ becsi iodm^ed almost exdxmvdy in ^hetmelves, Tbe minority (rf meardi is ^ill ^kvoted to tbdr kxai fm^lems, and few even btn^ to read any periodicals odio* tban AsKskan or of buiUUng up {m^xwitions frf»n detiaied obaervai^on. of scores of concrete cases, proiemiomi work goes mainly into tbe con^ruction, largdy a priori, (rf m o ( ^ wbk^ are pr(mded, aft» tbdr erection, widi a vary tbin ()uantitatii« f(Mindatkm (e.g. oi^irkal verification for a ui^e industrial country, covesmg at die nuMt a decadb or two), if indeed any numbers are usai at aU.* An increasing e^ort bas, vory reomdy, bem devc^ed to tbe Midy of otto ecmiomies-aUumgb die b^c reason, one fears, is nuire oftoi tl^ Cold War dian a desire to make ecoiunnics a respectable Mibje(^. But since die in^tutions woiking in tbk fidd are doii^ little to coor^ate t t ^ woAt the tttk of (irawing gas^and cimdusi(»aft will be £ar from euy.^ In aU sdoitii^ subj(K:ts, progren bas dtpeod^ to a c(Miwlerable j pg p on systematic and cmnparative resear(^ Tl^ organized matmal on cbanges in econ(Hnic structure is v«y tbin. Wbat (fees exot a doe largely to diree people-Claik,^ Kuznets,* and Qiener]^*-uid to die United ^ l^st dividiaf thea acowding to the d^j^rae of offiitzBl plaaning. It cxmU be argued that thn tnutacends tte ksvd of tndttirtT^ftli*iitVMf w ft cfitetiwi ol rlawrifiratiTm f^srscHMily. however, I bet^we that fcNr many aa&tytical j^ifposes. Cola has DM»e in axtasmm with (tay) V«M»iMla than with East Gennaay.
• 'The undenrtaiulmg most i»»t, bcmevvr, be al^wed to jamp azid fly from partk^lars to remote %*«imff aiul of iUou»st tlie highest g«a»raihy ( s a ^ as ti^ first pni^iles. as b are called, oi arts aod things}' Pnmcts Bacoo. Tks Fwsi Bo<A of Aphorisms, C.LV.
& ti readiog became he wrot» at a comqxndJagly pnmlttve sfesge ia the g g ment ol t ^ natttral sckmoea.
* A few FoiuidatkiBS ^ovkie much of the iwoessary fiaa&oe aral tlwy ooald inint oo a certain, evtm if Umt^sd, «f^w4a"diira*Kwi Foomlation o^f^dahtf however, have a ^ fcompndleiisiUe) fou* ol bei^ ooaBttored dktatorial-and oae most admit that wontd be groat daa^rav dtmng tm jsresnit eariy stage <rf tlie rabject if its d k were his^red b^ pHremature dDcJsntui <m what lai^Qts KK wortii ri * Tt C d f B P M h * Ttu CoMdMofU of Bcomoimc Proffrtss, Most n»i»trch wt8^«« aow are somewhat catttioiis lAoat s^nag thk material, but mtbody can ctaiteaige Colin dark's tight to be M d the tnaower in k is s»ws of pap p * See his s»ws of papen m 'Bxxsuxauc Devi^opownt a»i Oaltnial Change' ser • Enpedidly 'Pattsus of E«»omic Growth' {Am^icam E&momic Rmrimi, Se ^py p 1960). whidk » a candidate &n- b^ng ocam^ettd tte Kahn «rtkte of Ihia g^Hsmtitm. It h wf8th iMttmg that white BritUi eocaKMaakte led the way m ^ prevk^ majcn- ^ r i h d ^ w<Mrk today a being dam afaauMrteotaely by Americans.
M
F T pUticJ reooB it ii h d to the Seoit^uit
^
^ y g y y
Surveys', S«MMW. FIMT poUticaJ reaooBs, it ii hud tor the to Me thtt i l tii^

## Página
Apnrt fron tfme, w^^g&i^^Bsa^ tmoBtk
^ p of cMBitftett ttidie wi^A^iof tibe LI^B A tdbool of itr«ffi!taia&ta» aod tba it tufficmdty ftoA^ I bdkv^ to be d d to otiber ptrta of tbe wmkl.
p
Tbe pot^^itkai oi geneialisi^m in i d ^ wofk m mgmtf^ baikldng fitcal ttrudiiie tavd ikt ecomiawkit of tibe' firm teem listed, becMne <rf grot in^its^Mifid ^Mkxtocm to be fytaoL Ikywevor, one p ^ reto-ve ^i^jment oo diit undl a decmle or two frmn mm, hf ^nA^ck lime m diffecm oooztfrkt wiU doiditibtt bsve It can, of courte, be a i g i ^ tlyrt in ^ univevMtiet oi die p coimirkt, at katt, lexta dhonltf be baed on t]» load modd, «i t b ^ treat pfeteat, becntte mott ecwiomlttt wiU be wisidi^ for toctl cwnpanwt or Becmite of tbe u^uoue oi tudi comtikt in i , and tbeir rdatively twsoet^yl ftmctionii^ tbere would alto be bkig to be nid for eoooKiintttt in ncm-iiMiiittrial countmt acquiring at katt a goieral acquahUaiMe w ^ dik modd. Tbk k aU w ^ and good pronded it k recognised at a b^^ily q > e ^ C«K. EVOI tl^o, it couM be argued tb^ m t ^ more i^ovitMm tbould be made for Uie wbo win at tooM perkxl or anotbor be comoned in «ffine wi^ widti tbe problem dfnmi-iiiduttrialeocmorakt. However, ux tone, tbk ob^clkm wiU ckmbtl^s dkq^Mar. Tbe growtib oi com^^navt ectmomiet diould lead to tbe creatkm of a more goieral fnxaewf^ into wbidi qfiedal catet (like induttrial , ox petroleum ecofiom^t) can be A uidul gui<te in tbe reccmttructkin i^ eccmomict ^R^icb k now ttarting couM be die £dknni^ modett but revdutionary idogan: Ecommiict k die oi Eco dfeoold be mads bore <rf a new aakm <n ora^ai&tiw aoaumikt, edited by U o y d BiBj^uMt.
T w o v i t e i B « b a v e a b m d f imfieared: F o m g m T n A tmd A§ N ^ U E b KmiSSiitoetfgat a n d T k « E m t u m i e * oflJabmrhy P b o ^ B r o w n .
